[CN-458] Initial version of WAN Replication tutorial (#1)
hazelcast-guides/hazelcast-platform-operator-wan-replication: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/hazelcast-platform-operator-wan-replication.adoc

> = Synchronize data between two Hazelcast clusters with Hazelcast Platform Operator 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Replicate Data between Two Hazelcast Clusters with Hazelcast Platform Operator 
```

:page-layout: tutorial
:page-product: operator
:page-categories: Cloud Native

> :page-enterprise: true

Reviewer 2: It's optional but you could add;
`:page-lang: go, java, node, python`

Reviewer: this will display the tutorial in search results when filtered by language

Author: Fixed.

:page-est-time: 10 mins

> :description: Learn how to sync up data between two Hazelcast clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: Learn how to keep data in sync across two Hazelcast clusters.
```

{description}

== Context
In this tutorial, you'll do the following:

- Deploy two Hazelcast clusters.

- Create a Hazelcast map configuration.

- Synchronize map data between two Hazelcast clusters.

== Before you Begin

Before starting this tutorial, make sure that you meet the following prerequisites:

* Up and running https://kubernetes.io/[Kubernetes] cluster
* Kubernetes command-line tool, https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl]
* Deployed xref:operator:ROOT:index.adoc[Hazelcast Platform Operator]

== Step 1. Start the Hazelcast Cluster

. Create a license secret
+
Create a secret with your link:http://trialrequest.hazelcast.com/[Hazelcast Enterprise License].
+
[source, shell]
----
kubectl create secret generic hazelcast-license-key --from-literal=license-key=<hz-license-key>
----

> . Create Hazelcast Clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create the Hazelcast clusters.
```

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Run the following command to create first Hazelcast cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Run the following command to create the first cluster.
```

+
[source, shell]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: hazelcast.com/v1alpha1
kind: Hazelcast
metadata:
  name: hazelcast-first
spec:
  clusterSize: 1
  repository: 'docker.io/hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise'

>   version: '5.1-slim'

Reviewer 3: What can we do about the versions, they will be outdated after some time.

Author: We do it in other tutorials as well. We should probably create a ticket to fix all of them if we want to change it.

Reviewer: is there a way to always specify the latest release?

Also is slim recommended? We don't provide any information about how to add other modules to the classpath when using Operator.

Author: Removed version. We are now using default version from the operator.

  licenseKeySecret: hazelcast-license-key
EOF
----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Run the following command to create second Hazelcast cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. Run the following command to create the second cluster.
```

+
[source, shell]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: hazelcast.com/v1alpha1
kind: Hazelcast
metadata:
  name: hazelcast-second
spec:
  clusterSize: 1
  repository: 'docker.io/hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise'
  version: '5.1-slim'
  licenseKeySecret: hazelcast-license-key
EOF
----
+

> . Check Clusters Status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Check the status of the cluster to make sure that it's running.
```

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Run the following commands to see the cluster status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

+
[source, shell]
----

> $ kubectl get hazelcast

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl get hazelcast
```

> NAME               STATUS    MEMBERS   EXTERNAL-ADDRESSES

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
+
[source,shell]
----
NAME               STATUS    MEMBERS   EXTERNAL-ADDRESSES
```

Reviewer: separate output from commands to allow users to copy/paste

hazelcast-first    Running   1/1
hazelcast-second   Running   1/1

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
```

> . Get the Address of the second Hazelcast Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> After verifying that the cluster is `Running` and all the members are ready, run the following command to find the discovery service address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Find the addresses of the clusters.
```

We are finding the addresses of both clusters here, not just the second.

+
[source, shell]
----

> $ kubectl get service hazelcast-first hazelcast-second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl get service hazelcast-first hazelcast-second
```

> NAME               TYPE        CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
+
[source,shell]
----
NAME               TYPE        CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
```

> hazelcast-first    ClusterIP   10.96.134.7   <none>        5701/TCP   1m

Reviewer 3: I think we should also use `exposeExternally` to allow users to run clients from their local. Otherwise they will not know what to do with cluster IPs.

Author: OK.

Author: Done.

hazelcast-second   ClusterIP   10.96.72.2    <none>        5701/TCP   1m

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
```

+

> The field `CLUSTER-IP` or `EXTERNAL-IP` is the address of your Hazelcast cluster.

Reviewer: Isn't it just `CLUSTER_IP` here? the external IP is none.

Author: Changed to EXTERNAL-IP.

== Step 2. Create WAN Replication Configuration

> . Create Map in the first cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a map in the first cluster.
```

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Run the following command to create the Map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

+
[source, shell]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: hazelcast.com/v1alpha1
kind: Map
metadata:
  name: example-map
spec:
  hazelcastResourceName: hazelcast-first
EOF
----

> . Create WAN Replication Configuration. We will use first cluster as replication source and set endpoint value to to second cluster address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a WAN Replication Configuration. Use the second cluster as the target cluster to receive the WAN Replication events.
```

+
Run the following command to configure the replication
+
[source, shell]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: hazelcast.com/v1alpha1
kind: WanReplication
metadata:
  name: example-wan-replication
spec:
  mapResourceName: example-map
  targetClusterName: dev

>   endpoints: "<SECOND-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>"

Reviewer 2: As Muhammet mentioned, we should either use exposeExternally or explain what `CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP` is.

Author: Done.

EOF
----

> . Configure the Hazelcast client to connect to the first cluster service address. [[Configure-Client]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. [[configure-client]]Configure the Hazelcast client to connect to the first cluster, using its address.
```

            '<FIRST-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>'
        ]
    }
};
const client = await Client.newHazelcastClient(clientConfig);
----
--

Go::
+
--
[source, go]
----
import (
	"log"

	"github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-go-client"
)

func main() {
	config := hazelcast.Config{}
	cc := &config.Cluster
	cc.Network.SetAddresses("<FIRST-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>")
	ctx := context.TODO()
	client, err := hazelcast.StartNewClientWithConfig(ctx, config)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}
----
--

Python::
+
--
[source, python]
----
import logging
import hazelcast

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

client = hazelcast.HazelcastClient(
    cluster_members=["<FIRST-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>"],
    use_public_ip=True,
)
----
--

====
+
Now you can start the application to fill the map.
+
[tabs]
====

Java::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/java
mvn package
java -jar target/*jar-with-dependencies*.jar fill
----
--

NodeJS::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/nodejs
npm install
npm start fill
----
--

Go::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/go
go run main.go fill
----
--

Python::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/python
pip install -r requirements.txt
python main.py fill
----
--

====
+

> You should see the following output.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can mention they need to stop the client at some point because all of them are running infinite loops. Or we could just put a specified number of entries.

Author: Same here. We use this examples in other tutorials. Should I fix all of them?

+
[source, shell]
----
Successful connection!
Starting to fill the map with random entries.
Current map size: 2
Current map size: 3
Current map size: 4
Current map size: 5
Current map size: 6
Current map size: 7
Current map size: 8
Current map size: 9
Current map size: 10
----

> == Step 3. Check if map values are present in both clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Step 3. Verify that the Map Entries were Replicated
```

> . Verify size of the map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step, you verify the size of the map on the second cluster to make sure that it received all the WAN Replication events.
```

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Configure the Hazelcast client to connect to the second cluster address as you did in <<Configure-Client, Configure the Hazelcast Client>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Configure the Hazelcast client to connect to the second cluster as you did in <<configure-client, Configure the Hazelcast Client>>.
```

+
[tabs]
====

Java::
+
--
[source, java]
----
ClientConfig config = new ClientConfig();
config.getNetworkConfig().addAddress("<SECOND-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>");
----
--

NodeJS::
+
--
[source, javascript]
----
const { Client } = require('hazelcast-client');

const clientConfig = {
    network: {
        clusterMembers: [
            '<SECOND-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>'
        ]
    }
};
const client = await Client.newHazelcastClient(clientConfig);
----
--

Go::
+
--
[source, go]
----
import (
	"log"

	"github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-go-client"
)

func main() {
	config := hazelcast.Config{}
	cc := &config.Cluster
	cc.Network.SetAddresses("<SECOND-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>")
	ctx := context.TODO()
	client, err := hazelcast.StartNewClientWithConfig(ctx, config)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}
----
--

Python::
+
--
[source, python]
----
import logging
import hazelcast

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

client = hazelcast.HazelcastClient(
    cluster_members=["<SECOND-CLUSTER-SERVICE-IP>"],
    use_public_ip=True,
)
----
--
====

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Now you can start the application to check the map size and see if the replication was successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start the application to check the map size and see if the WAN Replication was successful.
```

+
[tabs]
====

Java::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/java
mvn package
java -jar target/*jar-with-dependencies*.jar size
----
--

NodeJS::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/nodejs
npm install
npm start size
----
--

Go::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/go
go run main.go size
----
--

Python::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd clients/python
pip install -r requirements.txt
python main.py size
----
--

====

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> You should see the following output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You should see the following output:
```

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[source, shell]
----
Successful connection!
Current map size: 12
----

== Clean Up

> To clean up the created resources remove the all Custom Resources and PVCs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove all Custom Resources and PVCs, do the following:
```

[source, shell]
----
kubectl delete secret hazelcast-license-key
kubectl delete $(kubectl get wanreplications,map,hazelcast -o name)
kubectl delete pvc -l "app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=hazelcast-platform-operator"
----

== See Also

> - xref:operator:ROOT:backup-restore.adoc[]

Reviewer 2: I checked [The WAN replication doc PR](https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-platform-operator-docs/pull/42).  It is not merged but it seems the page name will be `wan-replication`.
```suggestion
- xref:operator:ROOT:wan-replication.adoc[]
```

Author: Fixed.
